[Music]
welcome to Top cast episode 6 about the
problem of induction the first podcast
in a series on the nature of science
[Music]
professor Russell owned a chicken each
morning he would get up early and feed
his chicken the chicken being an
anthropomorphic chicken thought what a
wonderful thing this was and was excited
each morning to see professor Russell
come into the coop with the feed the
chicken went to sleep each night
expecting that tomorrow the food would
come and indeed the chickens seemed to
be right the chicken predicted that each
day he would be fed he was sorely
surprised then when on christmas eve of
all mornings kind professor Russell came
in to decapitate him what does the story
of Russell's chickens suggest it
suggests this no amount of observing a
certain thing over and again is enough
to entitle you to predict that that
thing will continue on again even one
more time that alone ten more times or
forever no number of sunrises suggests
that tomorrow the Sun will rise no
number of breaths that you take suggest
that the next won't be your last in
other words making predictions from the
particular to the general is simply not
possible well so what for so many years
it was unclear exactly how science was
justified in making the claims that it
did a group of philosophers and
scientists in the 1950s worked on this
particular problem among many others the
main group of scientists and
philosophers work in Vienna and came to
be known as the vienna circle the vienna
circle developed a style of philosophy
called logical positivism it was all
about the idea that all knowledge comes
to us through our experiences and a
purely logical process is the best way
to solve a philosophical problem insofar
as there are philosophical problems one
consequence as they saw it of logical
positivism was the ability to justify
scientific theories everyone knew by
then that mathematics was a deductive
system and they believed mathematics
proved its truths with certainty
in the last few episodes I've argued
that this position turns out not to be
correct you do not get certainty in
mathematics as for science well if it's
not purely deductive then what is it how
could you justify your theory if it was
not able to be purely deduced from the
evidence in the same way that
mathematics proves its conclusions the
logical positivists came up with the
idea of verification you verified your
theory how well through observations
repeated observations so if you and
Newton presumably you watched an Apple
fall from a tree and then another and
then another and then another according
to the logical positivists you then came
up with a theory about gravity and your
theory is verified through further
observations now you cannot prove your
theory it's not deductive but well it's
still pretty well justified isn't it so
the process of verifying a theory using
a method of justification based upon
repeated observation became known as
induction scientific induction so
scientific induction is supposed to be a
process of justification you repeatedly
observe a certain phenomena like a
falling Apple and then come up with a
theory which is then verified by further
observations you were then entitled
based on your theory to make predictions
like each time an Apple falls from a
tree it'll hit the ground now there's a
real problem with this we saw that with
Russell's chicken Russell's chicken
observed that each morning the farmer
would feed him he predicted this would
continue he turned out to be wrong when
he lost his head and was put on the
table that night for Christmas dinner
what's happened here it seems like
induction can go badly wrong
[Music]
but if induction can go badly wrong
doesn't that surely spell trouble for
scientific theories which are justified
by induction does this bring all of
science into question as unreliable and
poorly justified no no it does not
because science does not justify its
theories using induction induction plays
no part in the formation of scientific
theories and it never has in fact no one
ever justifies anything scientific
theories or not using induction okay
that's a big claim it's a big claim to
say that we never use induction never
know it was the great Scottish
philosopher David Hume who around 1740
clearly stated that induction cannot be
logically justified and that this seemed
to be a problem for science but it's not
because science does not rely on
induction and never has but Hume was one
of the first to most clearly Express the
problem of how to explain just why it is
we are justified in believing our
scientific theories and believing that
they're reliable he was a smart man who
wondered about the nature of cause and
effect and how science worked Hume was
right in believing that we cannot be
certain of our scientific theories and
he also knew that induction was flawed
so his problem was to wonder how then
are we justified in believing our
scientific theories he wasn't the first
the Greek philosopher Sextus empirical
in around 200 AD mentioned the problem
of induction in his writings and we're
going to find that so many discussions
in analytical philosophy can trace their
roots to one or more of the ancient
Greeks since Hume people have still
wondered how it is that we can justify
our scientific theories people who still
wonder about that today do not realize
that the question has indeed been
answered
now sure this philosophical question had
to wait around two more centuries for a
solution but the solution was found it
turned out that science simply does not
proceed by induction science does not
work that way so how the science work
then well I'm glad you asked forget
induction well don't forget it it's
useful to know the misconceptions that
many especially sociologists of science
and those who write some science
textbooks have about science induction
is certainly a big concept and it's
still debated today but most of us
interested in the philosophy of science
and scientists themselves know that
induction is dead the problem with
induction is that it is simply not a way
of justifying things induction not only
cannot justify scientific theories it
cannot justify anything it's not a
method of justification you simply are
not entitled to reason from the
particular to the general Russell's
chicken shows you that given a set of
observations the farmer fed me today the
farmer fed me yesterday the farmer fed
me today before that and so on the
prediction the farmer will feed me
tomorrow does not follow not only does
it not follow but something even worse
than that a general prediction like this
is simply not a theory a theory explains
something in this case the thing that
requires explaining is the farmers
behavior now given one theory about the
farmers behavior namely that the chicken
is a loved pet then the chicken might
very well derive a certain prediction
from this theory one prediction he might
derive would be well the farmer will
continue to feed me and he believes that
this was justified because he believes
in the theory that the farmer loves him
because he's a pet but given another
theory to begin with another as it turns
out more
accurate theory namely that the chicken
is being fattened up for Christmas
dinner and another quite different
prediction would be derived one day this
bleeding will stop when the farmer wants
to cook me so given nothing but a set of
observations namely the feeding of the
chicken repeatedly we are not entitled
to predict anything just yet we first
need a theory next we'll explain how
that works in science so how do we
reason in science the scientific method
is not about verification it's about
falsification we'll get to precisely
what that means in a moment for now
let's also look at how the inductive
estate science wrong the idea that
induction works at all forms a
significant part of how some talk texts
and the top guide explain how science
works the inductive estoy de suggests
that scientists make observations and on
the basis of those observations
generalize a theory we have seen this
does not work and it cannot work so what
do scientists do them what scientists
actually do is solve a problem they're
problem solvers currently for example
the world's cosmologists have a problem
the rate of the expansion of the
universe is greater than expected
according to general relativity given
the amount of mass and energy in the
universe the rate of expansion is
accelerating that's a problem one
proposed solution is what is called dark
energy this solution itself raises
questions because when the mathematics
of quantum theory is applied to dark
energy we get a value for the equivalent
zero-point energy as it's called to be
10 to the power of 120 times greater
than expected this is another problem
observed in fact it has been said that
this is the worst theoretical prediction
in the history of physics we need a new
solution
so this is how science works problems
require solving and phenomena require
explanations here's a historical problem
from science why is it that all the
objects in the sky seem to rise in the
east and set in the West the Sun the
Moon the Stars and the planets one
solution is that the earth is a
motionless sphere in the center of the
universe surrounded by a bigger sphere
called the celestial sphere which itself
rotates now holes in the celestial
sphere give us the appearance of stars
in the sky but now there's a problem
this particular theory can account for
the fact that the planets appear not to
be fixed to the celestial sphere like
the stars are they appear to wonder
about the sky and rather random ways
that's a problem now one solution was to
give up the idea of the celestial sphere
but keep the earth at the center in
general theories with the earth of the
center are called geocentric theories
and you can have a geocentric theory in
which all the planets are objects that
are in orbit around the Earth however
these planets don't go around the earth
in simple circles but rather in complex
orbits called epicycles the notes to
accompany this top cast have a diagram
explaining it what if he cycles are the
purpose of the geocentric theory and
epicycles was to explain the problem of
why it is that the planets appear to
wander across the sky the astronomer
Ptolemy in 300 BC develop this theory to
such sophistication that it was able to
predict the motion of planets to a high
degree of accuracy this theory was
terribly complicated though and as time
went on it was obvious that ptolemies
predictions were not as accurate as they
first seemed to be the theory required
ad hoc revision the theory was kept but
it required the revision of putting
epicycles onto epicycles onto epicycles
every time the planet deviated from
where it was predicted to be astronomers
just added another epicycle clearly this
was an
this factory it was Copernicus who
suggested that really things would be
much simpler with the Sun at the center
and the earth and other planets going
around it that requires fewer
assumptions and you do not need all
these complications of epicycles later
Galileo and Kepler would further improve
the theory with precise mathematics and
the idea that the orbits were ellipses
not perfect circles now perhaps you've
heard of Occam's razor I'll have more to
say about that in the next episode on
science but let's just say for now that
even in the absence of better
predictions the heliocentric theory is
here that the Sun is at the center beats
Ptolemies geocentric theory not
necessarily because it makes better
predictions indeed at the time it
couldn't but because it relies on far
fewer assumptions about the existence of
all these complicated epicycles the
Galilean worldview that put the Sun at
the center explained in a simple way why
it is that celestial bodies appear to
rise in the east and set in the West and
why it is that the planets follow more
complicated pubs across the sky further
it made predictions about where any
particular celestial object would be at
any time on any night of the year with
high degree of accuracy all of this with
far fewer assumptions unlike the raft of
assumptions that Ptolemy needed epicycle
after assumed epicycle after assumed
epicycle Galileo was able to solve this
problem with an elegant solution his
heliocentric theory predicted a number
of things including the pads planets
followed and the fact that because not
everything had to go around the Sun the
moons of Jupiter could be accounted for
Galileo himself was the first one to
discover moon's going around Jupiter the
first foreign named after him they
called the Galilean moons Galileo's
heliocentric theory could also account
for the phases of Venus and he could
explain precisely when they were going
to occur eventually all of these things
were observed and explained and
predicted so there we have it problem
proposed solution prediction observation
now the thing is Galileo's predictions
about the motions of planets was
falsifiable that means it was possible
for Galileo to have been wrong and this
is one of the big keys about scientific
theories falsification ism the ability
for a theory to be wrong Karl Popper was
perhaps the most famous philosopher of
science to have ever lived
you
he was born in Austria in 1902 and is
well known not only as someone who
developed a theory of how science works
and our scientific theories are
justified but also as a political
philosopher who produced some of the
most advanced and creative theories
about how an open and flourishing
society should be structured his ideas
are some of the strongest and most
articulate against authoritarianism and
totalitarianism of all sorts now Papa
despite being from Austria was not a
member of the vienna circle although he
was in contact with them he was a critic
of their logical positivist
philosophical movement and he rejected
the idea that scientific theories could
ever be verified he also rejected their
idea that there was no such thing as a
philosophical problem this was a theory
put forward by vidcon Stein he found
that what scientists actually do is
propose a bold conjecture that seeks to
explain phenomena scientists then
attempt to refute the conjecture if the
conjecture or theory is not refuted then
it is conditionally accepted now papa
was a genius and he did most of his work
at the prestigious London School of
Economics before going to New Zealand to
take up a position at the Canterbury
University College in Christchurch he
was rejected for a job in Australia due
to anti-semitism in the late 1930s well
done fellas kicking goals on that one
the view of science that Papa has is
really a view of how knowledge in
general is created for this reason his
view is more broadly called papirrin
epistemology he saw the acquisition of
knowledge as a problem solving process
at schools around the world now this
underpins the way students learn at
least it's directing the way students
are educated more than in the past there
is less emphasis on rote learning and
more emphasis on discovery students
tended to construct their own theories
with guidance the students then test
these theories about the world in
science we call those tests or attempts
to refute the theory experiments those
which are refuted
dismissed or altered while those which
are not are conditionally accepted all
knowledge therefore is conditional all
knowledge consists of theories about the
world these theories are explanations
and explanations can be good or bad your
knowledge of science is made up of
scientific theories your knowledge of
history historical theories politics
political theories your beliefs about
ethics constitute an ethical theory
about the world your knowledge of what
your best friend is doing right now
consists of a theory about her your
theory may be close to the truth or far
from that it may be based upon much
convincing evidence or it may not be in
other words your theory may be good or
bad the criteria for good is that a
theory explains what it sets out to and
explains a broad range of phenomena the
broader of range of phenomena the theory
explains then the deeper that theory
must be and importantly a good
explanation also makes precise
predictions consider the scientific
explanation that is called quantum
theory quantum theory is the theory
about matter and energy at the subatomic
scale in fact it explains the behavior
of all subatomic particles it explains
superconductivity and how computer chips
work it explains how fluorescent tubes
produce light and it is quantum theory
that enables us to have knowledge of
extremely distant galaxies in our
universe the disparate phenomena that
quantum theory links is so broad that no
other theory comes close and as for
predictions well the degree of precision
that quantum theory can obtain is like
specifying the width of Australia to an
accuracy of the width of one human hair
such bold predictions are just asking
for the theory to be falsified and yet
it has not been as we will see some of
the conclusions of quantum theory are
very counterintuitive but we are
compelled to accept them because of the
fact that quantum theory puts itself out
there to be falsified with highly
accurate predictions and yet it has not
been falsified sure one day it might be
but this is not to suggest that we
cannot
trust quantum theory now for example we
explain genetic inheritance now through
the theory of DNA we explain that genes
are passed from one generation to
another via the DNA the DNA contains a
code for producing all of your features
under the right conditions this whole
field of genetics like quantum theory
constitutes a theory now both may be
wrong but what are the chances that DNA
has absolutely nothing to do with
genetics what are the chances that
everything we know about quantum theory
is false well the chances are
effectively zero we may change these
theories but because the predictions
they make us so precise a wholesale
rejection of our best theories today is
going to be very difficult but we will
have more to say about this in a
different podcast we will also find that
is falsification ism that enables us to
distinguish between what cancer science
and what does not poppers idea of
falsifiable theories enable us to
explain how Galileo can say things like
on the night of October 27 1640 Jupiter
should be right overhead with Mars at 45
degrees declination or Venus should be
rising just in the east years before any
of these events happened if he turned
out to be wrong then he would know that
his theory was flawed so that's the
method it has nothing whatever to do
with the so-called induction scheme at
no point in the story did Galileo set
night after night watching planets and
generalizing a theory from those
observations alone no there was a
problem the Ptolemaic theory was
unwieldy and in precise a simpler theory
with fewer assumptions could solve the
problems with the Ptolemaic theory and
this simpler theory is closer to the
truth now it's worth noting that the
Ptolemaic theory although way off could
have been worse at least it had the
planets moving in orbits sure they were
the wrong type of orbits but all but
still the fact that planets move in
orbits was something that was true that
was subsumed by the first heliocentric
theory which got us closer to the truth
Copernicus heliocentric theory suggested
the orbit
perfect circle's now this was better but
it took a Galileo to improve it further
still later the astronomer Kepler and
also especially Newton improve things
still further with elegant laws of
motion which linked the orbits of the
planets with the tides on the earth and
apples falling to the ground Newton's
theory rested on very few assumptions
made accurate predictions and unified
diverse phenomena solving many problems
in the process this is the mark of a
good scientific theory we can never be
sure that we have certain truth in
science but this is not a problem for a
scientist who is not after certain truth
scientific theories are explanations and
the best explanation survive so what
about professor Russell's chicken well
the chicken had actually formed a
thorough in his head to explain the
behavior of the professor before the
moment when he started making
predictions he theorized that the
professor was keeping him as a treasured
and much-loved pet a prediction which
comes logically from such a theory is
that the professor will therefore
continue to feed the chicken but the
theory was wrong and it was falsified in
a dramatic fashion on Christmas Day as I
explained earlier if the chicken had
developed a theory which correctly
explained the farmers behavior namely
why is it that he has been fed each day
by the farmer then the chicken would
have formulated the following theory the
farmer is feeding me because he wants to
fatten me up for Christmas dinner when
he will eat me the point is that any
number of theories can explain a set of
observations in order to make a
prediction that a certain phenomena will
continue to occur you first need a
theory in mind that explains what's
going on that theory would explain that
the phenomena is going to continue or
perhaps it'll explain the phenomena is
going to stop you see the Sun Rise each
day you don't simply conclude on that
basis alone that therefore the Sun will
continue to rise every other day in fact
that's not a scientific theory that's
just a prediction and science is not
primarily about predictions it's about
explanations the
explanations will allow you to derive
predictions that the Sun has risen every
day might conceivably give rise to a
problem a problem like why does it seem
to be the case of the Sun rises in the
east and sets in the west each day or
what is the Sun at all to solve this
problem you need to use a theory at the
moment the best available to us is the
theory from astronomy and astrophysics
and physics and and a whole raft of
sciences that go on to explain what the
Sun is and how it works and why it is
that it appears to rise in the east and
set in the West in this case the full
armor man Tyrion of science would
explain to us that the Sun appears to
rise due to the motion of the earth and
this motion is not expected to cease for
billions of years well before this but
still billions of years from now the Sun
will see shining however this will not
occur in our lifetime and all of this
allows us to predict that the Sun is
going to continue to rise each and every
day of our lives so if you've read some
texts on the subject of how science
works including various resources about
talk you will find an erroneous scheme
the claim is that scientific theories
are produced in the following way you
make observations you generalize these
observations into a theory you then make
more observations and these justify the
theory and it is this scheme I have
argued along with Papa is clearly false
the way science actually works is in the
following way and I have taken almost
everything that I've said here directly
from a scientist I have mentioned before
David Deutsch science works by first
identifying a problem it then suggest
solutions which possibly solve the
problem these solutions are criticized
now in science we include among our
methods of criticism a special type
called experimental tests these
experimental tests then enable us
possibly to replace our erroneous
theories with the ones that solve the
original problem we may then encounter
new problems to solve
and the cycle begins again at this point
I want to highlight a link that exists
here between science and mathematics we
have seen the induction in science
indeed induction as a means of
justification in general simply is not a
way that we reason no way we can reason
or do reason the logical positivists
textbooks and common sense are all wrong
but in mathematics there is a procedure
called mathematical induction what about
it mathematical induction is a process
senior students of mathematics learn in
order to prove certain theorems it is a
very valuable and useful means of proof
and it is deductive let me say that
again mathematical induction is a
deductive process unfortunately it
shares the term induction with that
other induction we just discredited but
the two are entirely different some talk
texts and even some maths texts allude
to the idea that mathematics uses
induction that naive induction to
establish certain mathematical formulae
is true this is incorrect for example
consider the following surprising fact
about odd numbers the number 1 is equal
to 1 squared okay big deal stay with me
on this one plus 3 has two terms and
it's also equal to 2 squared all right
one plus three plus 5 has three terms
and it's equal to 3 squared okay let's
keep going one plus three plus five plus
seven notice what I'm doing here I'm
just adding up all the odd numbers one
plus three plus five plus seven that's
got four terms and you guessed it it's
equal to four squared so the pattern
seems to be that for however many odd
numbers you add up then the sum of those
numbers is equal to the square of the
number of terms that you've added
together now naive induction would say
well you can conclude on the basis of
what seems to be going on that that's
actually the case so an inductive proof
would be that any sequence of odd
numbers definitely adds
up to a square of the number of odd
numbers that you've added up proof done
no no no I presume you get your backside
kicked pretty hard in mathematics class
if you try to prove anything this way no
one in mathematics ever tries to prove a
theorem in that way certainly not at
University and not at school that sort
of induction just doesn't have a place
in mathematics so why would some text
that explain the way that mathematics
works even mention that this is a valid
method of justification I'm not too sure
I know that what such an argument would
do is that it leaves the door open for
anyone not fully trained in mathematics
to be able to say you can never be sure
that your proof will not fail for a
certain number of odd numbers so for our
example how do you know that the formula
doesn't fail once you get to let's say 1
million three hundred and fifty or 4291
you can't be sure so mathematics is
unreliable well if indeed we were
proving our theorems in the way that
I've just described then yes that would
be a valid criticism but no one in
mathematics proves things the way we
just did there but you can use a
technique called mathematical induction
to prove it now I know these uses of the
word induction are confusing induction
does have a lot of different meanings if
you look it up in the dictionary there
are quite a few there that haven't even
been covered by what I've been talking
about so far but suffice it to say in
real mathematical induction the method
of proof known as mathematical induction
what you do is you check that the
formula works in a particular case so
usually for the case of the number one
in our example of figuring out what the
sum of a certain sequence of odd numbers
adds up to we can take the number one
okay one's an odd number and one happens
to equal one squared plain and simple
well then you assume that the formula
works for a certain general case so we
could assume that it works for one plus
three plus five plus all the way up to k
where k is some odd number and you
assume that that equals to n squared
where n is the number of odd numbers
that you've just added up then you take
this assumption you show
that if it holds and it's the case that
it works for the next number up to all
the numbers k plus 2 this would be the
next odd number for those taking higher
levels of mathematics to proof of what
I'm talking about right now a company's
denotes this top cast now i'm not going
to attempt to go any further with the
proof it's almost impossible to teach
mathematics purely via audio suffice it
to say that mathematical induction can
best be compared to dominoes you push
one over and the rest are certain to go
over as well it's a rigorous deductive
mathematical proof as certain as
anything else in mathematics it's not
naive induction it has none of the flaws
of naive induction it's only flaw is
that it's called mathematical induction
it should be called proof by iteration
or something it seems to me that this
unfortunate turn of phrase gives much
fuel to some who want to suggest flaws
with mathematics now if you've heard the
other top casts on the nature of
mathematics you know that there are
sensible and very interesting
discussions to be heard about the
reliability of mathematical knowledge
and its limits but mathematical
induction and induction in general are
not included as part of these
limitations the limitations and
reliability of mathematics are actually
far more interesting than this stuff
about naive induction now finally for
this episode I want to emphasize that my
criticism here if the entire idea of
induction is not shared by all I said in
the very first episode of Top cast that
I would be presenting at times a
deciding Lee one-sided view of reality
we don't have time to go into all the
details about the debate here indeed
some people still believe in induction
and they believe in a certain type of
induction called Bayesian ism it's quite
popular among some philosophers but I
think that that's induction in a cheap
tuxedo as always these alternative views
are definitely worth researching and we
can continue the discussion online now
having spent an entire episode talking
about what science is not next time I'm
going to talk about what science really
is
for resources and links associated with
tacos visit the doc cast website at
www.engvid.com
you